Yeah. Um, okay. Um,
let's get started.
Elizabeth, welcome to the show.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> So, America's obsession with protein has
been growing for a while, but it has
seemed to me at least that in the past
year or so, has just gotten totally out
of control. Protein is literally
everywhere. You can't go to the grocery
store or open Instagram without being
bombarded with products bragging about
their protein content. So, we've come to
you. You've covered the food business
for a very long time. What in the entire
world is going on?
So, I have been writing about food for
about 15 years. And for most of that
time, the stories that I was working on
were about things like fine dining
trends or celebrity chefs. But in the
past couple of years, it's become
increasingly clear to me that people
really don't care as much about those
stories anymore. Like when I go to a
cocktail party or a dinner party and
somebody finds out that I write about
food, what they'll want to know about
isn't whether I've been to NMA. They
want to know about protein. Wow.
>> Yeah. And I'm not surprised because, as
you say, protein is everywhere.
>> Here are seven different ways you can
get in 50 g of protein in 30 seconds or
less. Nine slices of Kirkland unccured
Black Forest ham.
>> If you open your social media feed if
you're like me,
>> if you want to eat more protein, start
snacking on chicken.
>> You're going to see influencers sharing
their favorite protein powders or giving
you high protein recipe ideas.
Everything I eat in a day as an active
27year-old trying to get at least 130
grams of protein in every single day.
>> And then in the grocery store or in
convenience stores, protein loaded foods
are really everywhere.
>> Hey, Charlie the Tuda here reminding you
to take a protein break.
>> People are eating more naturally protein
richch foods.
>> Need a satisfying snack that helps you
keep going? You can always count on OOS
high protein
>> like meat sticks or cottage cheese or
Greek yogurt. But then there's also
protein being jammed into all of these
foods where you wouldn't traditionally
find it.
>> When you order the new lemon ricotta
blueberry protein pancakes with 37 grams
of protein, you get a smile on your
plate.
>> And in my reporting, I found that over
the past decade or so, the number of
food and beverage products hitting the
market with a high protein claim has
quadrupled.
>> Wow. I can I just say like I don't even
try to buy these products and they
somehow end up in my grocery cart and I
go home and all of a sudden I have like
protein oatmeal like really burly
oatmeal. It's crazy.
>> I mean it's hard to resist. They're
everywhere and the marketing claims and
the health claims are allowed and so it
really has kind of taken over our
packaged food landscape
>> and the increase that you've described
in terms of the products that it's in is
pretty remarkable. I want to start by
just asking you to tell me what is
protein actually. Break it down for me.
>> Protein is a macronutrient which means
it's a nutrient that our bodies need in
large amounts to function. Carbohydrates
are another macronutrient and fats are
the third macronutrient.
>> Got it? And what makes protein a little
bit different than carbohydrates and fat
is it's not only a source of energy,
it's also something that our bodies use
to build and repair tissues like muscle.
>> So, sounds important.
>> Exactly. We really need it. We need it
almost every day to be healthy. But when
it was first discovered in the 19th
century, nobody was really concerned
about people being deficient in it. I
mean, unless you were hospitalized or
you were malnourished or maybe you were
living in a developed country where you
didn't have regular access to all the
food you needed, it was pretty much
assumed that you were getting as much
protein as you needed.
>> So, it was, as we said, important, but
it it had nothing approaching the kind
of main character energy that it's
acquired today.
>> Absolutely not.
>> And what changed?
>> That's a story that plays out over
several decades. In the beginning,
protein supplementation was really only
used by bodybuilders. So, back in the
1950s, you started to see protein
powders hit the market, and that was for
this very niche group of people who were
really trying to bulk up in an unusual
way. But protein didn't really blow up
for the mainstream market until the
1990s. And there were two things
happening in the '9s that contributed.
One is that fitness culture had really
gone mainstream. So bodybuilding had
gone mainstream, but also people were
incorporating fitness into their lives
in a really different way than was the
case back in the 1950s and60s. But I'd
say the really big inflection point was
when protein started to be understood as
a tool for weight loss. And there were a
lot of different diets at that time that
relied on eating high amounts of
protein, small amounts of carbs in order
to get you to lose weight.
>> The spotlight is on Jenny Craig bars.
They're a good source of calcium and
protein. And that was really different
than the conventional approach of
counting calories to lose weight. So I
remember the Atkins diet.
>> The low carb lifestyle allows me to do
everything that I wanted to do and more.
>> Sure.
>> The South Beach diet was another big one
at the time.
>> And obviously Atkins and South Beach
have faded from the forefront of the
national consciousness. RIP. But even
though those two diet fads go away,
protein doesn't.
>> Yeah. The diet fads themselves change,
but the interest in protein never really
goes away. And it really surges during
the pandemic.
>> That's a time when not only are we all,
>> as we all remember, at home all the time
staring at our phones,
>> we have a lot of time to obsess about
things like what we're eating and
cooking. But we're also generally more
concerned about our own health and
wellness. So I think not only did people
spend a ton of time online, but the
topics around health and wellness and
longevity became much more mainstream
and appealing to people. And it's a time
when you start to see these influencers
emerge who are promoting the power of
proteins. And you have really all kinds
of people online promoting protein as
the key to a healthy diet. There are the
Make America Healthy Again influencers,
people like Alex Clark. Right now, I'm
preaching the gospel of a smoothie. I've
got two scoops of protein powder.
They're like 20 g of protein each. So,
that's like 40 g of protein, one
avocado, collagen powder, creatine,
colostrum. There are definitely the
CrossFit bros. My name is Drew and I eat
300 grams of protein daily while
training for 4 hours. Here's how I do
it.
>> Protein is protein. Protein equals
gains.
>> There are the strength training
feminists. Let's fight the patriarchy by
fixing your form. What we aren't going
to do is tell the world that muscle is
inherently masculine because it's not.
Muscle is human. Strength is human.
>> That show you how protein is really
going to help you get to your most
empowered self. At this point, people
are talking a lot more about the
importance of protein to build muscle.
And they're also talking about protein
in the context of longevity.
>> So that protein is going to be a
substance that helps you improve your
health and not only lose weight, not
only gain muscle, but also being the
best physical version of yourself. And
the two biggest and most influential
names here are Peter Aia and Andrew
Huberman.
>> Okay, tell me about these guys. Who are
they? What are they all about?
>> Welcome to the Hubberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science. Today we talk
about all those areas of health starting
with the very basics such as how to
evaluate one's own health status.
>> So Huberman is a professor of
neurobiology at Stanford. Okay. And he
hosts a very popular podcast that's all
about self-optimization.
Um huge listenership.
>> Peter Aia also hosts a very very
influential podcast. So it turns out
there's a real critical window in which
we are malleable.
>> He's a doctor though and his focus is on
longevity.
>> If you're under 2025,
you are still in that time of your life
when you are able to reach your
potential.
>> And these two guys are really
extraordinarily influential in the
nutrition space right now, the wellness
space. There's sort of a term that I've
heard thrown around. Huberman husbands.
>> What is that?
>> These are guys whose whole personality
is listening to Andrew Huberman. But
what does it mean for it to be your
whole personality?
>> You're basically living your entire life
in a very methodical way where every
moment you're trying to maximize your
health in that moment. They're wearing
aura rings for sure.
>> Oh,
>> they are probably taking omega-3
supplements. Maybe they're using AG1,
which is that greens powder that Andrew
Huberman actually advertises on his
podcast. a lot of very intentional
workout routines. I can't tell you the
number of times that I've been out with
friends and people reference Andrew
Hubman's podcast, Peter Aia's book,
which is called Outlive. They really
create a movement around the idea that
you can tweak your routines, your diet,
your exercise, your sleep, and
create the optimal version of yourself.
>> And and protein is a big part of that.
Protein is a big part of it for both of
them.
>> How so? Like how does it come into play?
>> Well, so they both believe that you
should be exercising every single day,
sometimes for multiple hours a day in
order to achieve your best self.
>> My god, who has the time?
>> Well, when you do a podcast that's all
about this, I think you build in the
time, right?
>> Sure.
>> Um, so in their in their world view,
people are exercising really quite a
lot. And when they do that much
exercise, you really have to eat a lot
of protein to be able to support the
muscle that you're building and the
muscle that needs to get repaired from
all the exercise. But why are they
saying you have to be exercising that
much?
So in Peter Aia's view, the goal at
midlife should be to build so much
muscle that as we naturally lose muscle
as we age, you end up in your 80s and
90s with enough muscle left that you're
still going to be able to like pick up
your grandkids and get out of bed,
right?
>> Bend over and stand back up. And so he
calls for this very high amount of
exercise to sort of bulk you up as
you're younger and therefore you'll end
up with a longer what he calls health
span.
>> It's like an insurance policy.
>> It's an insurance policy and it is one
that I will say is really based on
science. These guys are always citing
peer-reviewed science. They are
themselves doctors and scientists. So
you know there is good backing for this
way of thinking about how much exercise
you could be doing. Honestly, I'm
intrigued to be a part of this club. How
much protein do I need to consume
according to these guys?
>> So, I think the easiest way to think
about it is to look at what the standard
nutritional guidance is for how much
protein somebody should consume. So, the
recommended daily allowance of protein
is this is going to be a little bit of
math. It's8 g per kilogram of body
weight per day. So, if you weigh 150 lb,
that works out to 54 g, which is about
eight eggs.
>> Got it?
>> That's a lot, but it's doable. And
remember that you get protein in other
foods that you eat, too. So, the average
person is going to be able to hit that
amount of protein without trying to
specifically eat protein. Now, Peter Aia
and Andrew Huberman are looking for
their adherence to eat two or three
times as much protein, which is more
than 20 eggs a day.
>> A lot of eggs.
>> And that's for 150 lb person. Imagine if
you are a weightlifter bro. And so
you're 250 lbs. The numbers go up and
up. And so under this higher protein
regime, it's actually quite hard to get
as much protein as they're trying to get
without also eating an extraordinary
number of calories.
>> Sure, unless you want to eat like five
omelets a day or whatever.
>> And some people certainly do, but it's
hard to stick with and it really does
start to nudge up against the upper
limit of what you want to be consuming
calorie-wise and frankly how much food
you can even really stomach.
>> Okay, so there's a problem to solve
here. How do you get that much protein
without over consuming calories?
>> Yes. And the quest for that golden
protein to calorie ratio culminates in
what is the platonic ideal of the
protein bar. The David bar.
>> I have seen it. The gold wrapper. Very
flashy.
>> You have definitely seen it. It is very
flashy and it is everywhere. And I think
how the David Bar ended up everywhere
says a lot about the protein craze right
now.
>> Okay. You said the David Bar is the
platonic ideal of a protein bar. Tell us
about it.
>> The David Bar hit the market late last
year and it was invented by a guy named
Peter Rayal. And Ray Hall has a pretty
interesting backstory. A little over 10
years ago, he invented a different
protein bar called the RX Bar. And the
way that that came about was that he was
working in transportation logistics. So
basically trucking. He was really bored.
He got really into CrossFit. And he
started noticing that all of the bars
that were for sale at his CrossFit gym
just weren't moving. Nobody was buying
them.
>> And the reason was because people who do
CrossFit tend to do or did at the time
the Paleo diet.
>> And in the Paleo diet, you're really not
supposed to eat processed foods. So,
these processed, ultrarocessed protein
bars on the shelf at the gym, they
weren't selling. And he thought, "Well,
I could just make a paleo compliant
protein bar."
>> A more natural protein bar.
>> A more natural protein bar. So, he gets
together with a friend. They both put in
5,000 bucks. They start making these
bars out of nuts and egg whites and
dates and stuff like that, literally in
his mother's basement.
>> Wow.
>> Selling them at CrossFit gyms. And less
than 5 years later, they sell this
company for $600 million.
>> Unbelievable payday from what 10k total
investment from the two of them to 600
million.
>> Yeah, it was it was quite the coup. Um,
so he obviously becomes an
extraordinarily rich person. He could
have easily retired, but a couple of
years ago he gets the itch like he wants
he says he wants to be back in the game.
He wants to be back in the bar game. And
so he starts thinking about what he can
contribute to the space today. And where
his mind goes is protein. And what he
realizes is the world has really moved
on since the days of the RX bar.
>> That bar was 12 g of protein. Like
today, that's not cutting it. So what he
sets his sights on is creating a bar
with the highest possible amount of
protein in it. It's like this guy's in
the protein arms race, like the the
Manhattan Project for protein over here.
>> It's very 2025. So, he thinks what he
can add to the protein bar market today
is to make a bar that has not just more
protein than any other bar, but has a
better protein to calorie ratio than any
other bar. So, he wants to pack as much
protein into every calorie as possible.
>> And how exactly do you do that? How do
you cram all of that protein in without
adding calories?
>> What you're trying to do is minimize any
calorie in that bar that isn't from a
source of protein. He finds a
co-founder, a guy named Zach Raan, who
has experience in keto cookies, and they
start putting together the idea for this
bar. And so they start with what are
some pretty typical sources of protein.
They have milk protein and collagen and
whey protein concentrate and things like
that. They also add a whole bunch of
zerocalorie or low calorie sweeteners
which are pretty typical in protein
bars. That's a way to make it sweeter
without adding a lot of calories. But
their really big breakthrough is in the
fat. So protein bars need fat in order
to not just be like a pile of dry nasty
protein. Typically, protein bars use
plant oils of various kinds to supply
that fat. But where David really
innovates is that they find this
substance called EPG.
>> What is EPG?
>> I'm so glad you asked. EPG is a modified
plant fat that moves through your
digestive system mostly undigested. So
that means that it only delivers 92%
fewer calories than like a normal fat.
Can I just say I don't exactly jump in
an ingredient that moves through my
digestive system totally unimpeded. Like
that's that is a red flag for me. Maybe
for you Natalie, but for Peter Ray Hall
it is not. For Ray Hall, he sees this as
the secret to cracking the code to
creating a bar that delivers more
protein per calorie than anything else
on the market. So last September, he
brings this thing to market. It is a
smash hit. They, according to the
company, they start launch day with
40,000 people on their email list.
>> Wow.
>> They sell a million dollars worth of
bars in the first week.
>> Jeez.
>> Yeah. And they are on track, they say,
to sell $180 million worth of bars in
2025.
>> So, today marks the launch of David.
It's the product that I needed. It's the
piece of my portfolio that is missing
because prior to this, I could basically
only travel with jerky.
>> And how much protein is this bar
packing?
>> So, the RX bar, Rayal's original bar,
was 12 g of protein in about 200
calories. The David bar offers 28 g of
protein in 150 calories. So, it's really
quite an improvement,
>> an upgrade.
>> Yeah. And the bar turns out to be so
popular that their new problem becomes
how to get enough EPG.
>> That that secret ingredient.
>> That secret ingredient. So the secret
ingredient is made by this tiny
Indianapolis based company called Epig,
which owns the patent to this modified
plant fat EPG. And so they buy Epigo in
May. And now the patent and the
ingredient is theirs. So they don't just
discover the secret ingredient, they
buy, they own the secret ingredient.
>> Exactly. And to be fair, EPG was on the
market before David started using it.
There were a few products globally that
included EPG. There were sort of low
calorie desserts was the typical thing,
but it was not a mainstream ingredient.
And the point of owning EPG for the
company, it would seem, is controlling
the supply of this thing that allows you
to get to that gold standard we've been
talking about, that perfect ratio where
you can cram as much protein as possible
into this product without also over
consuming calories. This is it.
>> Exactly. And it allows the company to do
two things. One is to increase their own
supply of EPG so that the David Bar
universe can expand indefinitely and it
also keeps potential competitors from
having access to it. So, it's sort of a
win-win for them.
>> Okay. So, now they control this thing.
You said that the David universe might
just keep expanding. What would that
look like? So, we don't know yet exactly
what they have in mind, but from what
I've seen from spending time with the
company, it seems like what they're
focused on is not so much building a bar
company, but building a protein
platform. And the reason I say that is
the second product that they've put up
for sale on their website isn't another
bar. It isn't a powder. It's frozen cod.
>> Frozen cod. The instructions they give
are, I think, thaw, open, and boil. And
this is really just evidence of the
company's commitment to this high
protein paradigm.
>> Okay. I I have what at this point might
seem like a pretty basic 101 question
here, which is, is this even good for
us?
>> What? Like eating this much protein?
>> Yeah. Like, is it good to eat this way?
you know like the human body has been
working on a certain you know rhythm and
with certain inputs for a very long
time. Is reformulating that to
prioritize protein this much even like a
positive?
Well, it's unlikely that eating too much
protein is actually going to harm you.
Like unless you have a specific kidney
issue, we can eat a lot of protein and
it's it's not going to be bad for you.
But I think the larger question is what
is it that you're not prioritizing if
you're prioritizing protein to this
degree? So what other nutritional
compromises are you making in order to
consume so much protein? So one thing
that I find quite interesting about the
David bar is that it is ultrarocessed.
It's the definition of an ultrarocessed
food and it's incredibly popular at a
time when this other major food trend
has been unfolding which is people
becoming increasingly skeptical of and
worried about ultrarocessed foods.
>> Sure.
>> But here, because of the protein, the
ultrarocessed nature seems to get a
pass. And I think zooming out beyond the
David Bar specifically, we talked at the
beginning of the show about all of the
different places that you now find
protein that you wouldn't tra
traditionally find it. So, I think it's
a real question whether the people
choosing those foods are choosing them
for the protein content and whether
they're eating foods that aren't
necessarily as nutritious as they might
otherwise because they're chasing the
protein.
>> I ask you this with the understanding
that the David Bar is selling like
crazy, that it is very popular, that the
protein obsession is widespread.
Just help me understand the appeal.
Like, where's the pleasure in it? I
mean, protein bars and boiled cod are
not exactly my idea of like a yummy
meal, you know, and I just feel as
though what we've been talking about is
pulling apart our food into these
essential inputs. But where's the fun in
that? Where's the joy? I think for
certain people although there isn't joy
in a gustatory sense of eating these
protein bars there is a lot of joy in
the process of optimizing in this
feeling that by consuming foods like the
David bar we're moving ourselves just
incrementally closer to a physically
perfect version of ourselves and there
is a community that has been established
around that and it is a hobby or sort of
a pursuit that that I think does bring
people a lot of joy.
>> Right. And and I guess what you did tell
us was that part of this is at least
from the influencers perspective about
making ourselves strong enough so that
when we're older we can, you know, lift
our grandkids into the air, play with
them, run around. And certainly there
would be joy in that.
>> Absolutely. And I also think that eating
protein has become something more like
an identity or a lifestyle.
People seem to get a sense of belonging
from the types of diets they follow.
There's sort of a tribal quality to it.
So I think there's an element to this
that's also about fitting in with a
group and finding your identity in a
group of people with shared nutritional
goals,
>> right? I mean, you you feel like you're
with your people, your tribe, or like
religion almost.
>> It's interesting that you say religion
because when I talk to people about what
they eat, which is something that I do a
lot in my line of work, there's
something about the way that people talk
about their diets these days, that has
this almost evangelical quality to it.
like people really buy into the diets
they choose and they build community
around them in a way that is almost like
a faith-based activity. And like
religion, nutrition fads have their own
profits. And like religion, nutrition
fads have this sort of path to
righteousness laid out where if you live
in a specific way, you will achieve this
kind of nirvana that goes way beyond
losing weight or gaining muscle. And it
feels to me that for some people that's
what they're really getting out of this.
Suddenly protein is seeming kind of
spiritual.
>> Not for all of us. For a lot of people,
eating protein is still about trying to
pack on a couple pounds of muscle,
trying to stay full until dinner. But
yeah, I think for some people it is.
>> Elizabeth, thanks so much for coming on
the show.
>> Thanks, Natalie.
[Music]